Add blog post for version 5.0.0 (#45)
EventStore/eventstore.org: _posts/2019-02-18-event-store-5.0.0-release.md

---
title: "Event Store 5.0.0"
author: "Shaan Nobee"
layout: blog-post
---

Event Store 5.0.0 is out! It is available for the following operating systems:

- Windows
- Ubuntu 18.04
- Ubuntu 16.04
- Ubuntu 14.04
- macOS 10.9+
- CentOS 7 (Commercial version)
- Amazon Linux AMI (Commercial version)

> It's been a few long months since our last stable release of EventStore as we've invested time in increasing the stability of the server, providing higher quality builds and improving our user and developer experience.

Reviewer: @shaan1337 

```suggestion
It's been some months since our last stable release of EventStore as we've invested time in increasing the stability of the server, providing higher quality builds and improving our user and developer experience.
```

> There are some significant breaking changes, so we have decided to bump up the version to 5. EventStore's policy is to support the two latest major versions. Thus, as from now on, we will no longer support v3 and will continue to support v4 by providing important bug fixes. We, however, recommend all our users to upgrade to v5 to benefit from all the stability and performance improvements as well as the new features.

Reviewer: @shaan1337 

```suggestion
There are some significant breaking changes, so we've decided to bump up the version to 5. EventStore's policy is to support the two latest major versions. Thus, as from now on, we will no longer support v3 and will continue to support v4 by providing important bug fixes. We, however, recommend all our users to upgrade to v5 to benefit from all the stability and performance improvements as well as the new features.
```

> There are some significant breaking changes, so we have decided to bump up the version to 5. EventStore's policy is to support the two latest major versions. Thus, as from now on, we will no longer support v3 and will continue to support v4 by providing important bug fixes. We, however, recommend all our users to upgrade to v5 to benefit from all the stability and performance improvements as well as the new features.

Reviewer: @shaan1337 

```suggestion
There are some significant breaking changes, so we have decided to bump up the version to 5. EventStore's policy is to support the two latest major versions. Thus, as from now on, we will no longer support v3 and will continue to support v4 by providing important bug fixes. However we recommend that all our users to upgrade to v5 to benefit from all the stability and performance improvements as well as the new features.
```

## Highlights

> - The [EventStore Client API](https://www.nuget.org/packages/EventStore.Client/) now also targets the `netstandard2.0` framework. This means that the client can be consumed by .NET Core 2.0+ projects. We previously had a separate [.NET Core client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/EventStore.ClientAPI.NetCore/). This is the first part of the effort to migrate EventStore towards .NET Core. We are also planning to migrate the server in the near future.

Reviewer: @shaan1337 

```suggestion
- The [EventStore Client API](https://www.nuget.org/packages/EventStore.Client/) now also targets the `netstandard2.0` framework. This means that the client can be consumed by .NET Core 2.0+ projects. We previously had a separate [.NET Core client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/EventStore.ClientAPI.NetCore/). This is the first step in the effort to migrate EventStore towards .NET Core. We are also planning to migrate the server in the near future.
```

- The [EventStore Client API](https://www.nuget.org/packages/EventStore.Client/) now also targets the `net452` framework. We previously targeted only the `net46` framework.

- Google's V8 has been upgraded to version 7.0 from version 5.2. EventStore's projection library uses the V8 engine to execute Javascript code. This upgrade brings several performance optimizations to projections and the latest Javascript language features. Please consult [V8's blog](https://v8.dev/blog/) for the full list of changes.

- Mono has been upgraded to 5.16.0.220 from version 4.6.2. This upgrade brings more stability to Linux builds as well as new features such as TLS 1.2 support. Please consult the [mono release notes](https://www.mono-project.com/docs/about-mono/releases/) for the full list of changes.

> - We are releasing macOS packages again. A `.pkg` installer and tarball package is currently available for download.

Reviewer: @shaan1337 Maybe…

```suggestion
- We are releasing macOS packages again. A `.pkg` installer and tarball package is currently available for download. A Homebrew package is also in progress.
```

- The [EventStore Embedded Client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/EventStore.Client.Embedded/) now works on all platforms: Windows, Linux and macOS. It was previously limited to Windows only. Linux and macOS require an installation of mono 5.16.0.220.

> - Many new features, bug fixes and enhancements! Please consult the Changelog for more details.

Reviewer: @shaan1337 Is there a link to the changelog?

## Upgrade Procedure

> If you're running an EventStore cluster, we recommend to upgrade to version 5.0.0 by doing a rolling upgrade from version 4.1.1-hotfix1 without downtime:

Reviewer: @shaan1337 

```suggestion
If you're running an EventStore cluster, we recommend you upgrade to version 5.0.0 by doing a rolling upgrade from version 4.1.1-hotfix1 without downtime:
```

  * A new configuration option named `MaxAutoMergeIndexLevel (int)` has been added which defines the highest PTable level up to which PTable index files will be merged automatically. Let's denote the maximum merge level you have set in your configuration by `L` to simplify the explanation below.
  * To merge PTables that have reached the specified level `L`, an endpoint URL can be manually triggered by doing a `POST` request to `/admin/mergeindexes`. This will merge all the PTables at level `L` to level `L+1`. Also, if there are any PTables that are at level `L+2` or higher they will be merged down to level `L+1`.
  * Once set, the maximum merge level can be decreased in your configuration. However, increasing it in your configuration will require a full index rebuild.  
  * For quick reference, default PTable levels are as follows (assuming that you have not changed `MaxMemTableSize` which is `1M` by default):  
    * Level 0 - 1M index entries
    * Level 1 - 2M index entries
    * Level 2 - 4M index entries
    * Level 3 - 8M index entries
    * Level 4 - 16M index entries
    * Level 5 - 32M index entries  

>     --- Depending on your hardware configuration, merges can take several minutes as from this level, you can verify your logs to get a better idea of the amount of time taken ---

Reviewer: @shaan1337 

```suggestion
 Depending on your hardware configuration, merges can take several minutes as from this level, you can verify your logs to get a better idea of the amount of time taken.
```

    * Level 6 - 64M index entries  
    * Level 7 - 128M index entries  
    * Level 8 - 256M index entries  
    ...
    * Level K - 2^K x 1M index entries

> * [#1774](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1774) - **(Projections)** Add a `FaultOutOfOrderProjections` option (default: `True`) to allow the user to specify if a projection should be faulted when there is a discontinuity in event ordering. For example, if a stream has a `$maxAge` or `$maxCount`, a projection processing this stream may not receive some events if they have already "expired". In case `FaultOutOfOrderProjections` is set to `False`, an error will simply be logged and the projection will continue processing events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [#1774](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1774) - **(Projections)** Add a `FaultOutOfOrderProjections` option (default: `True`) to allow the user to specify if a projection should be faulted when there is a discontinuity in event ordering. For example, if a stream has a `$maxAge` or `$maxCount`, a projection processing this stream may not receive some events if they have already "expired". In case `FaultOutOfOrderProjections` is set to `False`, an error is logged and the projection will continue processing events.
```

* **[Packaging/Performance]** Add `--optimize=inline` mono runtime optimization to native packages

### Miscellaneous
* [#210](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore.UI/pull/210) - **(UI)** Remove bower components from repository
* [#1823](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1823) - **(UI)** Install bower for UI builds
* [#1796](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1796) - **(API Docs)** Polish ExpectedVersion docs
* [#1800](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1800) - **(Server)** Add default file locations for macOS (for system-wide installations)
* [#1643](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1643) - **(Server)** Clean up persistent subscription logging (thanks to [@lscpike](https://github.com/lscpike)!)
* [#1629](https://github.com/EventStore/EventStore/pull/1629) - **(Server)** Clean up scavenge log (thanks to [@lscpike](https://github.com/lscpike)!)

> ## Where can I get the packages?

Reviewer: @shaan1337 I kind of feel like this should be nearer the top.

Reviewer: In fact all of this section down until the end, likely the most important parts that people will want to read and all are right at the bottom of a very long document.
